flux/manifests/04-apps/README.md, before:

# Applications

This directory contains user-facing applications and workloads deployed in the cluster.

> **Navigation**: [← Back to Flux README](../README.md)

## Overview

The applications layer contains user-facing workloads and services organized by functional categories:

- **Application Templates**: Baseline configurations for common application patterns
- **Artificial Intelligence**: AI/ML applications and MCP servers for LLM tool integration
- **Management**: Administrative and workflow automation tools
- **Integration Examples**: Examples of infrastructure integration patterns

## Components

### Application Templates

- [**Demo App**](demo-app/README.md) - **Baseline template** for application configuration patterns, demonstrating Authentik SSO, Gateway API routing, and SMB storage integration using the reusable `generic-app` Helm chart.

### Artificial Intelligence

- [**AI Applications**](artificial-intelligence/README.md) - Overview of AI and machine learning applications
  - [**OpenWebUI**](artificial-intelligence/openwebui/README.md) - Web-based user interface for interacting with Large Language Models (LLMs) with Authentik SSO integration and Gateway API routing
  - [**MCP Servers**](artificial-intelligence/mcp-servers/README.md) - Model Context Protocol servers for AI tool integration:
    - [**OSV**](artificial-intelligence/mcp-servers/osv/README.md) - Open Source Vulnerabilities scanner for security analysis
    - [**GoFetch**](artificial-intelligence/mcp-servers/gofetch/README.md) - Web content fetching and processing service
    - [**MKP**](artificial-intelligence/mcp-servers/mkp/README.md) - Kubernetes resource management and monitoring
    - [**Grafana**](artificial-intelligence/mcp-servers/grafana/README.md) - Grafana dashboard and data source management

### Management

- [**Management Applications**](management/README.md) - Overview of management and administrative applications
  - [**Companion**](management/companion/README.md) - Bitfocus Companion stream deck software deployed using the generic-app chart with Longhorn storage and Authentik SSO
  - [**Kuber**](management/kuber/README.md) - iOS Kubernetes dashboard token management for mobile cluster access
  - [**n8n**](management/n8n/README.md) - Workflow automation platform with Authentik SSO integration, PostgreSQL backend, and Gateway API routing for creating and automating workflows

### Application Patterns

Each application follows consistent patterns that will be templated:

- **Authentik Integration**: SSO through Authentik outposts
- **Gateway API Routing**: External access through Gateway API
- **Storage Integration**: Persistent storage with appropriate storage classes
- **Monitoring**: Prometheus metrics and Grafana dashboards
- **Security**: RBAC, network policies, and security contexts

## Architecture

### Application Deployment Model

Applications are deployed using:

- **Kubernetes Resources**: Deployments, Services, ConfigMaps, etc.
- **Helm Charts**: Generic-app chart for standardized application patterns
- **Kustomize**: For configuration management and customization
- **Flux**: For GitOps-based deployment and management

### Template Evolution

The demo app serves as a **baseline template** that has evolved into a reusable Helm chart:

1. **Phase 1 (✅ Completed)**: Kustomize-based configuration with individual manifests
2. **Phase 2 (✅ Completed)**: Helm chart with configurable values and templates
3. **Phase 3 (✅ Completed)**: Reusable `generic-app` Helm chart for multiple applications
4. **Phase 4 (✅ Completed)**: Production-ready chart with GitOps deployment through Flux
5. **Phase 5 (✅ In Progress)**: Real applications deployed using the chart (Companion, future apps)

### Integration Points

#### With Services Layer

- **Authentication**: SSO through Authentik
- **Traffic Management**: Gateway API for external access
- **Certificate Management**: Automatic TLS through cert-manager
- **Monitoring**: Integration with Prometheus and Grafana

#### With Infrastructure Layer

- **Storage**: Persistent volumes through Longhorn
- **Networking**: Network policies through Cilium
- **Security**: Policy enforcement through Kyverno
- **Observability**: Logging through Loki and metrics through Mimir

## Configuration

### Application Structure

Each application follows one of two patterns:

**Pattern 1: Generic-App Chart (Recommended)**

```
app-name/
├── README.md              # Application documentation
├── kustomization.yaml     # Kustomize configuration
├── helmrelease.yaml       # Flux HelmRelease using generic-app chart
└── namespace.yaml         # Namespace definition (optional)
```

**Pattern 2: Custom Manifests (Legacy)**

```
app-name/
├── README.md              # Application documentation
├── kustomization.yaml     # Kustomize configuration
├── namespace.yaml         # Namespace definition
├── deployment.yaml        # Application deployment
├── service.yaml           # Service definition
├── httproute.yaml         # Gateway API routing (if external access)
├── secret.yaml            # 1Password secret references
└── storage.yaml           # Storage configuration (if needed)
```

## Security Considerations

### Application Security

- **RBAC**: Role-based access control for application resources
- **Network Policies**: Network isolation and traffic control
- **Pod Security**: Security contexts and policies
- **Secret Management**: 1Password integration for sensitive data

### Access Control

- **Authentication**: SSO through Authentik
- **Authorization**: Policy-based access control
- **Audit Logging**: Comprehensive access logging
- **Session Management**: Secure session handling

## Monitoring and Observability

### Metrics Collection

- **Application Metrics**: Custom application metrics
- **Infrastructure Metrics**: Resource usage and performance
- **Business Metrics**: Application-specific business metrics
- **Alerting**: Automated alerting for issues

### Logging

- **Application Logs**: Structured application logging
- **Access Logs**: Authentication and authorization logs
- **Audit Logs**: Security and compliance logs
- **Performance Logs**: Performance and debugging logs

## Troubleshooting

### Common Application Issues

1. **Deployment Issues**

   ```bash
   # Check application pods
   kubectl get pods -n <app-namespace>

   # Check deployment status
   kubectl describe deployment <app-name> -n <app-namespace>

   # Check application logs
   kubectl logs -n <app-namespace> deployment/<app-name>
   ```

2. **Authentication Issues**

   ```bash
   # Check Authentik outpost
   kubectl get pods -n <app-namespace> -l app=outpost

   # Check blueprint configuration
   kubectl get configmap authentik-blueprint -n <app-namespace>

   # Check Authentik logs
   kubectl logs -n <app-namespace> deployment/ak-outpost-<app>-outpost
   ```

3. **Routing Issues**

   ```bash
   # Check HTTPRoute status
   kubectl describe httproute <route-name> -n <app-namespace>

   # Check Gateway status
   kubectl get gateway -n cilium-system

   # Check service endpoints
   kubectl get endpoints -n <app-namespace>
   ```

## Best Practices

### Template Development

1. **Pattern Extraction**: Identify common configuration patterns
2. **Value Parameterization**: Make configurations configurable
3. **Documentation**: Document all configurable parameters
4. **Testing**: Test template with different application types

### Application Deployment

1. **Health Checks**: Implement proper health check endpoints
2. **Metrics**: Expose Prometheus metrics for monitoring
3. **Configuration**: Use ConfigMaps for configuration management
4. **Security**: Follow security best practices for applications

### Integration

1. **SSO**: Integrate with Authentik for authentication
2. **Storage**: Use appropriate storage classes for data persistence
3. **Networking**: Leverage Gateway API for traffic management
4. **Monitoring**: Integrate with monitoring stack for observability

## Next Steps

### Chart Usage and Optimization

1. **Deploy More Apps**: Use generic-app chart for additional applications
2. **Chart Enhancement**: Add new features and integrations as needed
3. **Performance Tuning**: Optimize resource usage and scaling
4. **Security Hardening**: Implement additional security best practices

### Application Deployment

1. **Template Usage**: Use generic-app chart for new applications
2. **Customization**: Customize for specific application requirements
3. **Monitoring**: Configure dashboards and alerting rules
4. **Scaling**: Plan for application growth and performance needs

## External Resources

- [Kubernetes Application Deployment](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/)
- [Authentik Outpost Documentation](https://docs.goauthentik.io/docs/outposts/)
- [Gateway API HTTPRoute](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/httproute/)
- [Generic-App Helm Chart](../../../helm/generic-app/README.md) - Reusable application chart
- [Prometheus Metrics](https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/data_model/)
- [Kustomize Documentation](https://kustomize.io/)
- [Helm Chart Development](https://helm.sh/docs/chart_template_guide/)

Commit message:

feat(mealie): Add Mealie application with Authentik integration and PostgreSQL support
- Introduced Mealie, a self-hosted recipe manager, with its own namespace and Helm release configuration.
- Added Authentik blueprint for OIDC authentication.
- Configured PostgreSQL as the database backend with persistent storage.
- Updated kustomization.yaml to include Mealie resources and documentation in README.md.

flux/manifests/04-apps/README.md, after:

# Applications

This directory contains user-facing applications and workloads deployed in the cluster.

> **Navigation**: [← Back to Flux README](../README.md)

## Overview

The applications layer contains user-facing workloads and services organized by functional categories:

- **Application Templates**: Baseline configurations for common application patterns
- **Artificial Intelligence**: AI/ML applications and MCP servers for LLM tool integration
- **Management**: Administrative and workflow automation tools
- **Integration Examples**: Examples of infrastructure integration patterns

## Components

### Application Templates

- [**Demo App**](demo-app/README.md) - **Baseline template** for application configuration patterns, demonstrating Authentik SSO, Gateway API routing, and SMB storage integration using the reusable `generic-app` Helm chart.

### Artificial Intelligence

- [**AI Applications**](artificial-intelligence/README.md) - Overview of AI and machine learning applications
  - [**OpenWebUI**](artificial-intelligence/openwebui/README.md) - Web-based user interface for interacting with Large Language Models (LLMs) with Authentik SSO integration and Gateway API routing
  - [**MCP Servers**](artificial-intelligence/mcp-servers/README.md) - Model Context Protocol servers for AI tool integration:
    - [**OSV**](artificial-intelligence/mcp-servers/osv/README.md) - Open Source Vulnerabilities scanner for security analysis
    - [**GoFetch**](artificial-intelligence/mcp-servers/gofetch/README.md) - Web content fetching and processing service
    - [**MKP**](artificial-intelligence/mcp-servers/mkp/README.md) - Kubernetes resource management and monitoring
    - [**Grafana**](artificial-intelligence/mcp-servers/grafana/README.md) - Grafana dashboard and data source management

### Management

- [**Management Applications**](management/README.md) - Overview of management and administrative applications
  - [**Companion**](management/companion/README.md) - Bitfocus Companion stream deck software deployed using the generic-app chart with Longhorn storage and Authentik SSO
  - [**Kuber**](management/kuber/README.md) - iOS Kubernetes dashboard token management for mobile cluster access
  - [**n8n**](management/n8n/README.md) - Workflow automation platform with Authentik SSO integration, PostgreSQL backend, and Gateway API routing for creating and automating workflows
  - [**Mealie**](management/mealie/README.md) - Self-hosted recipe manager and meal planning application with Authentik SSO integration and Longhorn storage

### Application Patterns

Each application follows consistent patterns that will be templated:

- **Authentik Integration**: SSO through Authentik outposts
- **Gateway API Routing**: External access through Gateway API
- **Storage Integration**: Persistent storage with appropriate storage classes
- **Monitoring**: Prometheus metrics and Grafana dashboards
- **Security**: RBAC, network policies, and security contexts

## Architecture

### Application Deployment Model

Applications are deployed using:

- **Kubernetes Resources**: Deployments, Services, ConfigMaps, etc.
- **Helm Charts**: Generic-app chart for standardized application patterns
- **Kustomize**: For configuration management and customization
- **Flux**: For GitOps-based deployment and management

### Template Evolution

The demo app serves as a **baseline template** that has evolved into a reusable Helm chart:

1. **Phase 1 (✅ Completed)**: Kustomize-based configuration with individual manifests
2. **Phase 2 (✅ Completed)**: Helm chart with configurable values and templates
3. **Phase 3 (✅ Completed)**: Reusable `generic-app` Helm chart for multiple applications
4. **Phase 4 (✅ Completed)**: Production-ready chart with GitOps deployment through Flux
5. **Phase 5 (✅ In Progress)**: Real applications deployed using the chart (Companion, future apps)

### Integration Points

#### With Services Layer

- **Authentication**: SSO through Authentik
- **Traffic Management**: Gateway API for external access
- **Certificate Management**: Automatic TLS through cert-manager
- **Monitoring**: Integration with Prometheus and Grafana

#### With Infrastructure Layer

- **Storage**: Persistent volumes through Longhorn
- **Networking**: Network policies through Cilium
- **Security**: Policy enforcement through Kyverno
- **Observability**: Logging through Loki and metrics through Mimir

## Configuration

### Application Structure

Each application follows one of two patterns:

**Pattern 1: Generic-App Chart (Recommended)**

```
app-name/
├── README.md              # Application documentation
├── kustomization.yaml     # Kustomize configuration
├── helmrelease.yaml       # Flux HelmRelease using generic-app chart
└── namespace.yaml         # Namespace definition (optional)
```

**Pattern 2: Custom Manifests (Legacy)**

```
app-name/
├── README.md              # Application documentation
├── kustomization.yaml     # Kustomize configuration
├── namespace.yaml         # Namespace definition
├── deployment.yaml        # Application deployment
├── service.yaml           # Service definition
├── httproute.yaml         # Gateway API routing (if external access)
├── secret.yaml            # 1Password secret references
└── storage.yaml           # Storage configuration (if needed)
```

## Security Considerations

### Application Security

- **RBAC**: Role-based access control for application resources
- **Network Policies**: Network isolation and traffic control
- **Pod Security**: Security contexts and policies
- **Secret Management**: 1Password integration for sensitive data

### Access Control

- **Authentication**: SSO through Authentik
- **Authorization**: Policy-based access control
- **Audit Logging**: Comprehensive access logging
- **Session Management**: Secure session handling

## Monitoring and Observability

### Metrics Collection

- **Application Metrics**: Custom application metrics
- **Infrastructure Metrics**: Resource usage and performance
- **Business Metrics**: Application-specific business metrics
- **Alerting**: Automated alerting for issues

### Logging

- **Application Logs**: Structured application logging
- **Access Logs**: Authentication and authorization logs
- **Audit Logs**: Security and compliance logs
- **Performance Logs**: Performance and debugging logs

## Troubleshooting

### Common Application Issues

1. **Deployment Issues**

   ```bash
   # Check application pods
   kubectl get pods -n <app-namespace>

   # Check deployment status
   kubectl describe deployment <app-name> -n <app-namespace>

   # Check application logs
   kubectl logs -n <app-namespace> deployment/<app-name>
   ```

2. **Authentication Issues**

   ```bash
   # Check Authentik outpost
   kubectl get pods -n <app-namespace> -l app=outpost

   # Check blueprint configuration
   kubectl get configmap authentik-blueprint -n <app-namespace>

   # Check Authentik logs
   kubectl logs -n <app-namespace> deployment/ak-outpost-<app>-outpost
   ```

3. **Routing Issues**

   ```bash
   # Check HTTPRoute status
   kubectl describe httproute <route-name> -n <app-namespace>

   # Check Gateway status
   kubectl get gateway -n cilium-system

   # Check service endpoints
   kubectl get endpoints -n <app-namespace>
   ```

## Best Practices

### Template Development

1. **Pattern Extraction**: Identify common configuration patterns
2. **Value Parameterization**: Make configurations configurable
3. **Documentation**: Document all configurable parameters
4. **Testing**: Test template with different application types

### Application Deployment

1. **Health Checks**: Implement proper health check endpoints
2. **Metrics**: Expose Prometheus metrics for monitoring
3. **Configuration**: Use ConfigMaps for configuration management
4. **Security**: Follow security best practices for applications

### Integration

1. **SSO**: Integrate with Authentik for authentication
2. **Storage**: Use appropriate storage classes for data persistence
3. **Networking**: Leverage Gateway API for traffic management
4. **Monitoring**: Integrate with monitoring stack for observability

## Next Steps

### Chart Usage and Optimization

1. **Deploy More Apps**: Use generic-app chart for additional applications
2. **Chart Enhancement**: Add new features and integrations as needed
3. **Performance Tuning**: Optimize resource usage and scaling
4. **Security Hardening**: Implement additional security best practices

### Application Deployment

1. **Template Usage**: Use generic-app chart for new applications
2. **Customization**: Customize for specific application requirements
3. **Monitoring**: Configure dashboards and alerting rules
4. **Scaling**: Plan for application growth and performance needs

## External Resources

- [Kubernetes Application Deployment](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/)
- [Authentik Outpost Documentation](https://docs.goauthentik.io/docs/outposts/)
- [Gateway API HTTPRoute](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/httproute/)
- [Generic-App Helm Chart](../../../helm/generic-app/README.md) - Reusable application chart
- [Prometheus Metrics](https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/data_model/)
- [Kustomize Documentation](https://kustomize.io/)
- [Helm Chart Development](https://helm.sh/docs/chart_template_guide/)
