talos/README.md, before:

# Talos

## Overview

Talos is a modern Kubernetes distribution that is designed to be simple, secure, and reliable. It is a CNCF-certified Kubernetes distribution that is optimized for cloud-native applications.

### Kubernetes Hosts

| Hostname    | IP Address  | Role          | Hardware           |
| ----------- | ----------- | ------------- | ------------------ |
| talos-vm-01 | 10.50.8.10  | Control Plane | Virtual Machine    |
| talos-vm-02 | 10.50.8.11  | Control Plane | Virtual Machine    |
| talos-vm-03 | 10.50.8.12  | Control Plane | Virtual Machine    |
| talos-vm-04 | 10.50.8.13  | Control Plane | Virtual Machine    |
| lab-01      | 10.50.8.101 | Worker        | Dell Optiplex 7050 |
| lab-02      | 10.50.8.102 | Worker        | Dell Optiplex 7050 |
| lab-03      | 10.50.8.103 | Worker        | Dell Optiplex 7050 |

## Bootstrapping

Start by generating the secrets for the cluster.

```bash
talosctl gen secrets -o secrets.yaml
```

Next, create the configuration for the cluster. We'll set up:

- 4 virtual machine nodes (talos-vm-01 through talos-vm-04) as control plane nodes only
- Physical hardware (lab-01 through lab-03) as worker nodes

Generate configurations:

```bash
# Generate configurations
talosctl gen config \
  --with-secrets secrets.yaml \
  --config-patch-control-plane @patches/vm-patch.yaml \
  --config-patch-worker @patches/lab-patch.yaml \
  home "https://kubernetes.apocrathia.com:6443" \
  -o rendered/ \
  --force
export TALOSCONFIG="rendered/talosconfig"
```

This will generate the following files:

- `controlplane.yaml`: Control plane configuration
- `talosconfig`: Client configuration for talosctl
- `worker.yaml`: Worker configuration

Now, we can bootstrap the control plane nodes. Each node gets its own specific configuration patch to set its hostname:

```bash
# Apply configuration to each control plane node with its specific patch
for i in {1..4}; do
  NODE_NUM=$(printf "%02d" $i)
  IP_LAST_OCTET=$((i + 9))
  echo "Configuring talos-vm-${NODE_NUM} (10.50.8.${IP_LAST_OCTET})..."
  talosctl apply-config --insecure \
    --nodes "10.50.8.${IP_LAST_OCTET}" \
    --file rendered/controlplane.yaml \
    --config-patch "@patches/vm-${NODE_NUM}-patch.yaml"
done
```

While that's happening, let's make sure talosctl is configured to talk to the cluster.

```bash
export TALOSCONFIG="rendered/talosconfig"
talosctl config endpoint 10.50.8.10
talosctl config node 10.50.8.10 10.50.8.11 10.50.8.12 10.50.8.13
cp rendered/talosconfig ~/.talos/config
export TALOSCONFIG="~/.talos/config"
```

Next, we bootstrap the first control plane node.

```bash
talosctl bootstrap --nodes 10.50.8.10
```

Once the cluster is up, let's get the kubeconfig.

```bash
talosctl kubeconfig ~/.kube/config -n 10.50.8.10
```

Wait for the cluster to become ready.

```bash
watch -n 1 kubectl get nodes
```

Update the talosconfig to point to the VIP.

```bash
export TALOSCONFIG="rendered/talosconfig"
talosctl config endpoint kubernetes.apocrathia.com
talosctl config node 10.50.8.10 10.50.8.11 10.50.8.12 10.50.8.13
cp rendered/talosconfig ~/.talos/config
export TALOSCONFIG="~/.talos/config"
```

## Adding Worker Nodes

Now let's add the physical worker nodes (lab-01 through lab-03) to the cluster:

```bash
# Update talosconfig to include worker nodes
export TALOSCONFIG="rendered/talosconfig"
talosctl config endpoint kubernetes.apocrathia.com
talosctl config node 10.50.8.10 10.50.8.11 10.50.8.12 10.50.8.13 10.50.8.101 10.50.8.102 10.50.8.103
cp rendered/talosconfig ~/.talos/config
export TALOSCONFIG="~/.talos/config"

# Apply worker configuration to each physical node
for i in {1..3}; do
  NODE_NUM=$(printf "%02d" $i)
  IP_LAST_OCTET=$((100 + i))
  echo "Configuring lab-${NODE_NUM} (10.50.8.${IP_LAST_OCTET})..."
  talosctl apply-config --insecure \
    --nodes "10.50.8.${IP_LAST_OCTET}" \
    --file rendered/worker.yaml \
    --config-patch "@patches/lab-${NODE_NUM}-patch.yaml"
done
```

Verify the new nodes join the cluster:

```bash
kubectl get nodes
```

## Deployments

Go deploy [Flux](../flux/README.md)

## Updating Configurations

To update the Talos configuration on existing nodes:

```bash
# Generate new configurations with any changes
talosctl gen config \
  --with-secrets secrets.yaml \
  --config-patch-control-plane @patches/vm-patch.yaml \
  --config-patch-worker @patches/lab-patch.yaml \
  home "https://kubernetes.apocrathia.com:6443" \
  -o rendered/ \
  --force

# Apply new control plane configurations
for i in {1..4}; do
  NODE_NUM=$(printf "%02d" $i)
  IP_LAST_OCTET=$((i + 9))
  echo "Updating talos-vm-${NODE_NUM} (10.50.8.${IP_LAST_OCTET})..."
  talosctl apply-config \
    --nodes "10.50.8.${IP_LAST_OCTET}" \
    --file rendered/controlplane.yaml \
    --config-patch "@patches/vm-${NODE_NUM}-patch.yaml"
done

# Apply new worker configurations
for i in {1..3}; do
  NODE_NUM=$(printf "%02d" $i)
  IP_LAST_OCTET=$((100 + i))
  echo "Updating lab-${NODE_NUM} (10.50.8.${IP_LAST_OCTET})..."
  talosctl apply-config \
    --nodes "10.50.8.${IP_LAST_OCTET}" \
    --file rendered/worker.yaml \
    --config-patch "@patches/lab-${NODE_NUM}-patch.yaml"
done
```

The nodes will automatically apply the new configuration and restart any necessary services.

## Cluster Teardown and Rebuild

If you need to completely reset and rebuild the cluster, follow these steps:

Remove Flux and its resources (if installed):

```bash
flux uninstall
```

Reset each node in the cluster:

```bash
# Reset control plane nodes
for node in 10.50.8.{10..13}; do
  echo "Resetting $node..."
  talosctl reset --graceful=false --reboot --nodes $node --wait=false || echo "Failed to reset $node"
done

# Reset worker nodes (lab nodes)
for node in 10.50.8.{101..103}; do
  echo "Resetting $node..."
  talosctl reset --graceful=false --reboot --nodes $node --wait=false --endpoints $node || echo "Failed to reset $node"
done
```

Sometimes, this will fail on the first node. If that happens, go into the VM and reset it manually. When it boots from the talos image, select the reset option in the grub boot menu.

Finally remove the talos and kube config files.

```bash
rm ~/.talos/config
rm ~/.kube/config
```

Now, return to the bootstrapping steps and repeat.

Commit message:

feat(cilium): Add Cilium installation and configuration for Talos - Introduced Cilium as the CNI for Talos with a detailed installation guide. - Created necessary YAML files for Cilium HelmRelease, namespace, and node configuration. - Updated README files for both Talos and Flux to include navigation and installation instructions. - Adjusted bootstrap process to accommodate Cilium's requirements and PodSecurity settings.

talos/README.md, after:

# Talos

> **Navigation**: [Home](../README.md) | [Next: Cilium Installation →](./cilium-install.md)

## Overview

Talos is a modern Kubernetes distribution that is designed to be simple, secure, and reliable. It is a CNCF-certified Kubernetes distribution that is optimized for cloud-native applications.

### Kubernetes Hosts

| Hostname    | IP Address  | Role          | Hardware           |
| ----------- | ----------- | ------------- | ------------------ |
| talos-vm-01 | 10.50.8.10  | Control Plane | Virtual Machine    |
| talos-vm-02 | 10.50.8.11  | Control Plane | Virtual Machine    |
| talos-vm-03 | 10.50.8.12  | Control Plane | Virtual Machine    |
| talos-vm-04 | 10.50.8.13  | Control Plane | Virtual Machine    |
| lab-01      | 10.50.8.101 | Worker        | Dell Optiplex 7050 |
| lab-02      | 10.50.8.102 | Worker        | Dell Optiplex 7050 |
| lab-03      | 10.50.8.103 | Worker        | Dell Optiplex 7050 |

## Bootstrapping

Start by generating the secrets for the cluster.

```bash
talosctl gen secrets -o secrets.yaml
```

Next, create the configuration for the cluster. We'll set up:

- 4 virtual machine nodes (talos-vm-01 through talos-vm-04) as control plane nodes only
- Physical hardware (lab-01 through lab-03) as worker nodes

Generate configurations:

```bash
# Generate configurations
talosctl gen config \
  --with-secrets secrets.yaml \
  --config-patch-control-plane @patches/vm-patch.yaml \
  --config-patch-worker @patches/lab-patch.yaml \
  home "https://kubernetes.apocrathia.com:6443" \
  -o rendered/ \
  --force
export TALOSCONFIG="rendered/talosconfig"
```

This will generate the following files:

- `controlplane.yaml`: Control plane configuration
- `talosconfig`: Client configuration for talosctl
- `worker.yaml`: Worker configuration

Now, we can bootstrap the control plane nodes. Each node gets its own specific configuration patch to set its hostname:

```bash
# Apply configuration to each control plane node with its specific patch
for i in {1..4}; do
  NODE_NUM=$(printf "%02d" $i)
  IP_LAST_OCTET=$((i + 9))
  echo "Configuring talos-vm-${NODE_NUM} (10.50.8.${IP_LAST_OCTET})..."
  talosctl apply-config --insecure \
    --nodes "10.50.8.${IP_LAST_OCTET}" \
    --file rendered/controlplane.yaml \
    --config-patch "@patches/vm-${NODE_NUM}-patch.yaml"
done
```

While that's happening, let's make sure talosctl is configured to talk to the cluster.

```bash
export TALOSCONFIG="rendered/talosconfig"
talosctl config endpoint 10.50.8.10
talosctl config node 10.50.8.10 10.50.8.11 10.50.8.12 10.50.8.13
cp rendered/talosconfig ~/.talos/config
export TALOSCONFIG="~/.talos/config"
```

Next, we bootstrap the first control plane node.

```bash
talosctl bootstrap --nodes 10.50.8.10
```

Once the cluster is up, let's get the kubeconfig.

```bash
talosctl kubeconfig ~/.kube/config -n 10.50.8.10
```

Wait for the cluster to become ready.

```bash
watch -n 1 kubectl get nodes
```

Update the talosconfig to point to the VIP.

```bash
export TALOSCONFIG="rendered/talosconfig"
talosctl config endpoint kubernetes.apocrathia.com
talosctl config node 10.50.8.10 10.50.8.11 10.50.8.12 10.50.8.13
cp rendered/talosconfig ~/.talos/config
export TALOSCONFIG="~/.talos/config"
```

## Adding Worker Nodes

Now let's add the physical worker nodes (lab-01 through lab-03) to the cluster:

```bash
# Update talosconfig to include worker nodes
export TALOSCONFIG="rendered/talosconfig"
talosctl config endpoint kubernetes.apocrathia.com
talosctl config node 10.50.8.10 10.50.8.11 10.50.8.12 10.50.8.13 10.50.8.101 10.50.8.102 10.50.8.103
cp rendered/talosconfig ~/.talos/config
export TALOSCONFIG="~/.talos/config"

# Apply worker configuration to each physical node
for i in {1..3}; do
  NODE_NUM=$(printf "%02d" $i)
  IP_LAST_OCTET=$((100 + i))
  echo "Configuring lab-${NODE_NUM} (10.50.8.${IP_LAST_OCTET})..."
  talosctl apply-config --insecure \
    --nodes "10.50.8.${IP_LAST_OCTET}" \
    --file rendered/worker.yaml \
    --config-patch "@patches/lab-${NODE_NUM}-patch.yaml"
done
```

Verify the new nodes join the cluster:

```bash
kubectl get nodes
```

## Installing Cilium CNI

After bootstrapping the cluster, you'll need to install a CNI. We use Cilium as our CNI provider.

See [Cilium Installation Guide](./cilium-install.md) for detailed instructions on installing and configuring Cilium on Talos.

## Deployments

Go deploy [Flux](../flux/README.md)

## Updating Configurations

To update the Talos configuration on existing nodes:

```bash
# Generate new configurations with any changes
talosctl gen config \
  --with-secrets secrets.yaml \
  --config-patch-control-plane @patches/vm-patch.yaml \
  --config-patch-worker @patches/lab-patch.yaml \
  home "https://kubernetes.apocrathia.com:6443" \
  -o rendered/ \
  --force

# Apply new control plane configurations
for i in {1..4}; do
  NODE_NUM=$(printf "%02d" $i)
  IP_LAST_OCTET=$((i + 9))
  echo "Updating talos-vm-${NODE_NUM} (10.50.8.${IP_LAST_OCTET})..."
  talosctl apply-config \
    --nodes "10.50.8.${IP_LAST_OCTET}" \
    --file rendered/controlplane.yaml \
    --config-patch "@patches/vm-${NODE_NUM}-patch.yaml"
done

# Apply new worker configurations
for i in {1..3}; do
  NODE_NUM=$(printf "%02d" $i)
  IP_LAST_OCTET=$((100 + i))
  echo "Updating lab-${NODE_NUM} (10.50.8.${IP_LAST_OCTET})..."
  talosctl apply-config \
    --nodes "10.50.8.${IP_LAST_OCTET}" \
    --file rendered/worker.yaml \
    --config-patch "@patches/lab-${NODE_NUM}-patch.yaml"
done
```

The nodes will automatically apply the new configuration and restart any necessary services.

## Cluster Teardown and Rebuild

If you need to completely reset and rebuild the cluster, follow these steps:

Remove Flux and its resources (if installed):

```bash
flux uninstall
```

Reset each node in the cluster:

```bash
# Reset control plane nodes
for node in 10.50.8.{10..13}; do
  echo "Resetting $node..."
  talosctl reset --graceful=false --reboot --nodes $node --wait=false || echo "Failed to reset $node"
done

# Reset worker nodes (lab nodes)
for node in 10.50.8.{101..103}; do
  echo "Resetting $node..."
  talosctl reset --graceful=false --reboot --nodes $node --wait=false --endpoints $node || echo "Failed to reset $node"
done
```

Sometimes, this will fail on the first node. If that happens, go into the VM and reset it manually. When it boots from the talos image, select the reset option in the grub boot menu.

Finally remove the talos and kube config files.

```bash
rm ~/.talos/config
rm ~/.kube/config
```

Now, return to the bootstrapping steps and repeat.
