flux/manifests/02-infrastructure/longhorn/README.md, before:

# Longhorn - Distributed Storage

This directory contains the deployment configuration for Longhorn, a distributed block storage system for Kubernetes.

> **Navigation**: [← Back to Infrastructure README](../README.md)

## Overview

Longhorn provides persistent storage for Kubernetes workloads with features like:

- **Distributed Storage**: Replicated block storage across cluster nodes
- **Backup & Restore**: Automated backup to SMB storage
- **Disaster Recovery**: Cross-cluster replication and failover
- **Data Locality**: Best-effort data placement allowing replicas on different nodes for better availability
- **Volume Management**: Dynamic provisioning and expansion

## Architecture

### Components

- **Longhorn Manager**: Control plane managing volumes and nodes
- **Longhorn Engine**: Data plane handling I/O operations
- **Longhorn UI**: Web-based management interface
- **Longhorn Driver**: CSI driver for Kubernetes integration

### Storage Configuration

#### Persistent Storage

- **Storage Class**: `longhorn` (default)
- **Replicas**: 3 replicas per volume (configurable)
- **Access Modes**: `ReadWriteOnce`, `ReadWriteMany`
- **Volume Expansion**: Online expansion supported

#### Backup Configuration

- **Backup Target**: MinIO S3-compatible storage
- **Schedule**: Automated recurring backups
- **Retention**: Configurable retention policies

## 1Password Setup

Before deploying Longhorn, create the backup target credentials in 1Password:

1. In your 1Password vault, create a new item called `longhorn-backup-target-secret`
2. Add these fields:
   - **Field Label**: `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID` | **Value**: `your-minio-access-key`
   - **Field Label**: `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY` | **Value**: `your-minio-secret-key`
   - **Field Label**: `AWS_ENDPOINTS` | **Value**: `http://minio.minio-system.svc:9000`

The 1Password Connect Operator will automatically create a Kubernetes secret with these values.

## Features

### Data Protection

- **Replication**: 3-way replication for high availability
- **Snapshots**: Point-in-time volume snapshots
- **Backup**: Automated backup to external storage
- **Disaster Recovery**: Volume-level disaster recovery

### Performance

- **Caching**: Intelligent read/write caching
- **Data Locality**: Best-effort placement (replicas can be on different nodes)
- **I/O Scheduling**: Optimized I/O path
- **Resource Management**: Configurable resource limits

### Management

- **Web UI**: Built-in management interface
- **Metrics**: Prometheus integration
- **Alerts**: Integration with monitoring stack
- **Auto-scaling**: Dynamic replica management

## Access and Usage

### Web UI Access

- **Internal URL**: `http://longhorn-frontend.longhorn-system.svc:80`
- **External Access**: Via Gateway API with Authentik authentication
- **Authentication**: Integrated with Authentik SSO

### Storage Class Usage

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: example-pvc
spec:
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce
  storageClassName: longhorn
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 10Gi
```

### Volume Operations

```bash
# List volumes
kubectl get volumes -n longhorn-system

# Create snapshot
kubectl create -f volume-snapshot.yaml

# List backups
kubectl get backups -n longhorn-system
```

## Integration with Homelab

### Authentik Integration

- **Authentication**: SSO through Authentik outpost
- **Authorization**: Role-based access control
- **Blueprint**: Automated user and group management

### Monitoring Stack

- **Metrics**: Prometheus metrics collection
- **Dashboards**: Grafana visualization
- **Alerts**: Automated alerting for storage issues

### Backup Integration

- **MinIO Storage**: S3-compatible backup target
- **Automated Backups**: Scheduled backup jobs
- **Retention Policies**: Configurable cleanup

## Configuration

### Storage Settings

- **Default Replica Count**: Configured in `helmrelease.yaml`
- **Data Locality**: `best-effort` (replicas can be on different nodes for better availability)
- **Storage Over-provisioning**: 100%
- **Snapshot Retention**: Configured in `helmrelease.yaml`
- **Backup Retention**: Configurable via recurring jobs

### Resource Requirements

Resource limits and requests are configured in `helmrelease.yaml`.

### Node Configuration

- **Storage Path**: `/var/lib/longhorn` (default)
- **Scheduling**: Anti-affinity for high availability
- **Taints/Tolerations**: Configurable node selection

## Backup and Recovery

### Automated Backups

- **Schedule**: Daily backups configured
- **Target**: MinIO S3-compatible storage
- **Retention**: 30-day retention policy
- **Compression**: Automatic data compression

### Manual Operations

```bash
# Manual backup
kubectl create -f manual-backup.yaml

# Restore from backup
kubectl create -f restore.yaml

# List backup targets
kubectl get backuptargets -n longhorn-system
```

## Security Considerations

- **Network Policies**: Restrict access to Longhorn components
- **RBAC**: Minimal permissions for management operations
- **Encryption**: Data encryption at rest and in transit
- **Authentication**: SSO integration with Authentik

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

1. **Volume Attachment Failures**

   ```bash
   # Check volume status
   kubectl describe volume <volume-name> -n longhorn-system

   # Check node storage
   kubectl describe node <node-name>
   ```

2. **Backup Failures**

   ```bash
   # Check backup status
   kubectl get backups -n longhorn-system

   # Verify MinIO connectivity
   kubectl exec -n minio-system deployment/minio -- mc admin info local
   ```

3. **Performance Issues**

   ```bash
   # Check Longhorn metrics
   kubectl port-forward -n longhorn-system svc/longhorn-frontend 8080:80

   # Monitor I/O statistics
   kubectl get volumes -n longhorn-system -o wide
   ```

### Health Checks

```bash
# Check overall health
kubectl get nodes.longhorn.io -n longhorn-system

# Check volume health
kubectl get volumes -n longhorn-system

# Check replica status
kubectl get replicas -n longhorn-system
```

### Log Analysis

```bash
# Manager logs
kubectl logs -n longhorn-system deployment/longhorn-manager

# Engine logs
kubectl logs -n longhorn-system -l longhorn-engine

# UI logs
kubectl logs -n longhorn-system deployment/longhorn-ui
```

## Best Practices

### Storage Management

1. **Resource Planning**: Monitor storage usage and plan capacity
2. **Backup Strategy**: Regular backups with testing
3. **Disaster Recovery**: Test recovery procedures regularly
4. **Performance Monitoring**: Monitor I/O patterns and bottlenecks

### Operations

1. **Version Updates**: Keep Longhorn updated for security fixes
2. **Node Maintenance**: Plan for node maintenance windows
3. **Monitoring**: Set up comprehensive monitoring and alerting
4. **Documentation**: Maintain updated documentation

### Security

1. **Access Control**: Limit access to Longhorn UI and API
2. **Network Security**: Use network policies to restrict traffic
3. **Backup Security**: Secure backup credentials and data
4. **Audit Logging**: Enable audit logging for compliance

## External Resources

- [Longhorn Documentation](https://longhorn.io/docs/)
- [Longhorn Architecture](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.6.0/concepts/)
- [Backup and Restore Guide](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.6.0/snapshots-and-backups/)
- [Troubleshooting Guide](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.6.0/troubleshoot/)

Commit message:

docs(flux): standardize README structure and documentation links
Refactored README files across all Flux manifest directories to improve
consistency and maintainability. Changes include:

- Simplified opening descriptions by removing verbose "This directory contains..."
  patterns in favor of concise, direct descriptions
- Added standardized "Documentation" section near the top of each README with
  links to official documentation, replacing scattered external links
- Removed redundant "External Resources" sections from the bottom of READMEs
  to eliminate duplication and reduce maintenance burden

This standardization makes documentation easier to navigate, reduces
maintenance overhead, and ensures external links are consistently placed
and formatted across all component documentation.

flux/manifests/02-infrastructure/longhorn/README.md, after:

# Longhorn - Distributed Storage

Distributed block storage system for Kubernetes with replication, backup, and disaster recovery.

> **Navigation**: [← Back to Infrastructure README](../README.md)

## Documentation

- **[Longhorn Documentation](https://longhorn.io/docs/)** - Official documentation
- **[Architecture Guide](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.6.0/concepts/)** - System architecture
- **[Backup and Restore](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.6.0/snapshots-and-backups/)** - Backup documentation

## Overview

Longhorn provides persistent storage for Kubernetes workloads with features like:

- **Distributed Storage**: Replicated block storage across cluster nodes
- **Backup & Restore**: Automated backup to SMB storage
- **Disaster Recovery**: Cross-cluster replication and failover
- **Data Locality**: Best-effort data placement allowing replicas on different nodes for better availability
- **Volume Management**: Dynamic provisioning and expansion

## Architecture

### Components

- **Longhorn Manager**: Control plane managing volumes and nodes
- **Longhorn Engine**: Data plane handling I/O operations
- **Longhorn UI**: Web-based management interface
- **Longhorn Driver**: CSI driver for Kubernetes integration

### Storage Configuration

#### Persistent Storage

- **Storage Class**: `longhorn` (default)
- **Replicas**: 3 replicas per volume (configurable)
- **Access Modes**: `ReadWriteOnce`, `ReadWriteMany`
- **Volume Expansion**: Online expansion supported

#### Backup Configuration

- **Backup Target**: MinIO S3-compatible storage
- **Schedule**: Automated recurring backups
- **Retention**: Configurable retention policies

## 1Password Setup

Before deploying Longhorn, create the backup target credentials in 1Password:

1. In your 1Password vault, create a new item called `longhorn-backup-target-secret`
2. Add these fields:
   - **Field Label**: `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID` | **Value**: `your-minio-access-key`
   - **Field Label**: `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY` | **Value**: `your-minio-secret-key`
   - **Field Label**: `AWS_ENDPOINTS` | **Value**: `http://minio.minio-system.svc:9000`

The 1Password Connect Operator will automatically create a Kubernetes secret with these values.

## Features

### Data Protection

- **Replication**: 3-way replication for high availability
- **Snapshots**: Point-in-time volume snapshots
- **Backup**: Automated backup to external storage
- **Disaster Recovery**: Volume-level disaster recovery

### Performance

- **Caching**: Intelligent read/write caching
- **Data Locality**: Best-effort placement (replicas can be on different nodes)
- **I/O Scheduling**: Optimized I/O path
- **Resource Management**: Configurable resource limits

### Management

- **Web UI**: Built-in management interface
- **Metrics**: Prometheus integration
- **Alerts**: Integration with monitoring stack
- **Auto-scaling**: Dynamic replica management

## Access and Usage

### Web UI Access

- **Internal URL**: `http://longhorn-frontend.longhorn-system.svc:80`
- **External Access**: Via Gateway API with Authentik authentication
- **Authentication**: Integrated with Authentik SSO

### Storage Class Usage

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: example-pvc
spec:
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce
  storageClassName: longhorn
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 10Gi
```

### Volume Operations

```bash
# List volumes
kubectl get volumes -n longhorn-system

# Create snapshot
kubectl create -f volume-snapshot.yaml

# List backups
kubectl get backups -n longhorn-system
```

## Integration with Homelab

### Authentik Integration

- **Authentication**: SSO through Authentik outpost
- **Authorization**: Role-based access control
- **Blueprint**: Automated user and group management

### Monitoring Stack

- **Metrics**: Prometheus metrics collection
- **Dashboards**: Grafana visualization
- **Alerts**: Automated alerting for storage issues

### Backup Integration

- **MinIO Storage**: S3-compatible backup target
- **Automated Backups**: Scheduled backup jobs
- **Retention Policies**: Configurable cleanup

## Configuration

### Storage Settings

- **Default Replica Count**: Configured in `helmrelease.yaml`
- **Data Locality**: `best-effort` (replicas can be on different nodes for better availability)
- **Storage Over-provisioning**: 100%
- **Snapshot Retention**: Configured in `helmrelease.yaml`
- **Backup Retention**: Configurable via recurring jobs

### Resource Requirements

Resource limits and requests are configured in `helmrelease.yaml`.

### Node Configuration

- **Storage Path**: `/var/lib/longhorn` (default)
- **Scheduling**: Anti-affinity for high availability
- **Taints/Tolerations**: Configurable node selection

## Backup and Recovery

### Automated Backups

- **Schedule**: Daily backups configured
- **Target**: MinIO S3-compatible storage
- **Retention**: 30-day retention policy
- **Compression**: Automatic data compression

### Manual Operations

```bash
# Manual backup
kubectl create -f manual-backup.yaml

# Restore from backup
kubectl create -f restore.yaml

# List backup targets
kubectl get backuptargets -n longhorn-system
```

## Security Considerations

- **Network Policies**: Restrict access to Longhorn components
- **RBAC**: Minimal permissions for management operations
- **Encryption**: Data encryption at rest and in transit
- **Authentication**: SSO integration with Authentik

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

1. **Volume Attachment Failures**

   ```bash
   # Check volume status
   kubectl describe volume <volume-name> -n longhorn-system

   # Check node storage
   kubectl describe node <node-name>
   ```

2. **Backup Failures**

   ```bash
   # Check backup status
   kubectl get backups -n longhorn-system

   # Verify MinIO connectivity
   kubectl exec -n minio-system deployment/minio -- mc admin info local
   ```

3. **Performance Issues**

   ```bash
   # Check Longhorn metrics
   kubectl port-forward -n longhorn-system svc/longhorn-frontend 8080:80

   # Monitor I/O statistics
   kubectl get volumes -n longhorn-system -o wide
   ```

### Health Checks

```bash
# Check overall health
kubectl get nodes.longhorn.io -n longhorn-system

# Check volume health
kubectl get volumes -n longhorn-system

# Check replica status
kubectl get replicas -n longhorn-system
```

### Log Analysis

```bash
# Manager logs
kubectl logs -n longhorn-system deployment/longhorn-manager

# Engine logs
kubectl logs -n longhorn-system -l longhorn-engine

# UI logs
kubectl logs -n longhorn-system deployment/longhorn-ui
```

## Best Practices

### Storage Management

1. **Resource Planning**: Monitor storage usage and plan capacity
2. **Backup Strategy**: Regular backups with testing
3. **Disaster Recovery**: Test recovery procedures regularly
4. **Performance Monitoring**: Monitor I/O patterns and bottlenecks

### Operations

1. **Version Updates**: Keep Longhorn updated for security fixes
2. **Node Maintenance**: Plan for node maintenance windows
3. **Monitoring**: Set up comprehensive monitoring and alerting
4. **Documentation**: Maintain updated documentation

### Security

1. **Access Control**: Limit access to Longhorn UI and API
2. **Network Security**: Use network policies to restrict traffic
3. **Backup Security**: Secure backup credentials and data
4. **Audit Logging**: Enable audit logging for compliance
